---
layout: post
title:  "Generating and linking from C against a Rust library on Windows"
date:   2018-10-21 18:28:03 -0700
categories: [rust, update]
---
I started working on [xi-lib](https://github.com/dsp/xi-lib), which aims to provide a
simple C interface to [xi-editor](https://github.com/xi-editor/xi-editor). My initial research 
was focused on building a C library in Rust.

## The Rust FFI
Rust offers a powerful [FFI interface](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/first-edition/ffi.html). We can easily use `extern "C" fn` to
create functions that can be called from C. A simple example:

```rust
#[no_mangle]
pub extern "C" fn test() {
	println!("hello world");
}
```

Using `#[no_mangle]` ensures that the compiler does no additional name-mangling, allowing us to call this function from C, while 
`extern "C"` ensures that the function gets exported. There are a few other primitives that help writing FFI interfaces for C, which
can be found in the documentation.

## Generating header files
C/C++ code uses header files to define interfaces. In order to provide an FFI interface for C, we must provide a suitable headerfile
[cbindgen](https://github.com/eqrion/cbindgen) to the rescue! Cbindgen can create a header file for you, based on your `extern "C"` interfaces.
There are two ways of using cbindgen. I personally prefer to always generate a header file during a build, so we will use a *build.rs* to call
cbindgen during a build.

In our `Cargo.toml` add our *build-dependency*:
```toml
[build-dependencies]
cbindgen = "0.6.6"
```

Add a `build.rs`:
```rust
extern crate cbindgen;

use std::env;
use std::path::Path;
use cbindgen::Config;

fn main() {
    let crate_env = env::var("CARGO_MANIFEST_DIR").unwrap();
    let crate_path = Path::new(&crate_env);
    let config = Config::from_root_or_default(crate_path);
    cbindgen::Builder::new()
      .with_crate(crate_path.to_str().unwrap())
      .with_config(config)
      .generate()
      .expect("Unable to generate bindings")
      .write_to_file("headers/xilib.h");
}
```

We nwo generate a new header file during build. Note how we are configuring cbindgen to use a configuration file.

## cbindgen configuration
cbindgen comes with a good set of defaults. However in our case, those were not alway sufficient. For once, cbindgen
defaults to build C++ bindings, while we want C bindings. In addition it tries to parse dependent libraries for
types, in case they are needed. So far I don't want or need this, as I am trying to build a very clear abstraction
that does not accidentally leak an internal type in the header files. So we will disable it.

Our `cbindgen.toml` now looks like:
```toml
language = "C"
include_version = true

[parse]
parse_deps = false
```

Let's do a simple run:
```
$ cargo build
```
We now have a proper C library with a header file. But how can we use it?

## Generating DLLs
At this point we need to generate a library that contians our Rust code in an ingestible format for our C program.
Rust builds rlibs, a binary format of a library that is targeting other rust code. C/C++ linkers do not support rlibs,
so we need to go and build a dynmic or a static library. In my case I want a dynamic library.

We have to modify our `Cargo.toml` again. We are adding the configuration `crate-type` indication that we want to build
a dynamic library for C by using the argument **cdylib**. On MacOS this will produce a `.dynlib`, on Linux an `.so` and
on Windows a `.dll`.

```toml
[lib]
name = "xilib"
crate-type = ["cdylib"]
```

Building now results in a `xilib.dll` in *target/debug*. Now off to the final step, linking!

## The C program
Let's create a siple C program, `main.c`:

```c
#include <xilib.h>
int main() {
    foo();
    return 0;
}
```

In order to link it, we must:
1. Provide the pathg to xilib.h which was generated by cbindgen
2. Provide the definition of the library interface in form of a `*.lib` file.

For 2., cargo alreayd produced us an additional `xilib.dll.lib` file. So let's link it all together:
```
$ cl.exe /Iheaders/ target/debug/xilib.dll.lib main.c
```

We now can start our newly created `main.exe`. We must ensure that xilib.dll is in the same directory, and voila:
```
$ main.exe
hello world
```

Success.

